# <i class="fas fa-newspaper"></i> Papers

---

## First Author

These papers were led and written primarily by me:  

*  <paper link="paper-LAM" title="An Efficient and Accurate Formalism for the Treatment of Large Amplitude Intramolecular Motion" date="2012" journal="Journal of Chemical Theory and Computation">
We propose a general approach to describe large amplitude motions (LAM) with multiple degrees of freedom (DOF) in molecules or reaction intermediates, which is useful for the computation of thermochemical or kinetic data. The kinetic part of the LAM Lagrangian is derived using a Z-matrix internal coordinate representation within a new numerical procedure. This derivation is exact for a classical system, and the uncertainties on the prediction of observable quantities largely arise from uncertainties on the LAM potential energy surface (PES) itself. In order to rigorously account for these uncertainties, we present an approach based on Bayesian theory to infer a parametrized physical model of the PES using ab initio calculations. This framework allows for quantification of uncertainties associated with a PES model as well as the forward propagation of these uncertainties to the quantity of interest. A selection and generalization of some treatments accounting for the coupling of the LAM with other internal or external DOF are also presented. Finally, we discuss and validate the approach with two applications: the calculation of the partition function of 1,3-butadiene and the calculation of the high-pressure reaction rate of the CH3 + H → CH4 recombination.

</paper>

*  <paper link="paper-CVD" title="Studies of Gas-Phase Reactivity during Chemical Vapor Deposition of Boron Carbide (2012)" date="2012" journal="Ceramic Engineering and Science Proceedings">
Boron carbide is a key constituent of self-healing ceramic-matrix composites, due to its ability to fill matrix cracks by a liquid oxide phase upon oxidation. Its production for protective layers in a multilayered matrix can be performed by Chemical Vapor Infiltration. Since this process is difficult to manage in terms of deposit thickness and quality as a function of processing parameters, a modeling study has been developed. It features several steps: (i) ab-initio quantum chemical computation using the G3B3 method, (ii) derivation of thermochemical and kinetic data for the main species and reactions involved in the gas-phase mechanism, (iii) insertion of the obtained mechanism in a 0D thermochemical equilibrium solver and in a 1D chemical kinetic solver. Several specific tools have been developed and applied for a correct treatment of step (ii). An extension of the hindered rotor models with variable kinetic function has been designed for a correct computation of partition functions associated to internal rotations in molecules or transition states. The B/3Cl/H subsystem has received special attention because of transition states without local energy maxima, internal rotations, and reaction product valley bifurcations. Results are compared to experimental data and allow an identification of key species and main reaction pathways during deposition.
</paper>

*  <paper link="paper-Methyldichloroborane" title="Methyldichloroborane evidenced as an intermediate in the chemical vapour deposition synthesis of boron carbide" date="2011" journal="J Nanosci Nanotechnol">
The most recent ceramic-matrix composites (CMC) considered for long-life applications as thermostructural parts in aerospace propulsion contain, among others, boron-rich phases like boron carbide. This compound is prepared by thermal Chemical Vapour Infiltration (CVI), starting from precursors like boron halides and hydrocarbons. We present a study aiming at a precise knowledge of the gas-phase composition in a hot-zone LPCVD reactor fed with BCl3, CH4 and H2, which combines experimental and theoretical approaches. This work has brought strong evidences of the presence of Methydichloroborane (MDB, BCl2CH3) in the process. It is demonstrated that this intermediate, the presence of which had never been formally proved before, appears for processing temperatures slightly lower than the deposition temperature of boron carbide. The study features quantum chemical computations, which provide several pieces of information like thermochemical and kinetic data, as well as vibration and rotation frequencies, reaction kinetics computations, and experimental gas-phase characterization of several species by FTIR, for several processing parameter sets. The main results are presented, and the place of MDB in the reaction scheme is discussed.
</paper>

*  <paper link="paper-TheoreticalBCl3H" title="Theoretical Study of the Decomposition of BCl3 Induced by a H Radical" date="2011" journal="The Journal of Physical Chemistry A">
We report on a theoretical study of the gas-phase decomposition of boron trichloride in the presence of hydrogen radicals using ab initio energetic calculations coupled to TST, RRKM, and VTST-VRC kinetic calculations. In particular, we present an addition−elimination mechanism (BCl3 + H → BHCl2 + Cl) allowing for a much more rapid consumption of BCl3 than the direct abstraction reaction (BCl3 + H → BCl2 + HCl) considered up to now. At low temperatures, T ≤ 800 K, our results show that a weakly stabilized complex BHCl3 is formed with a kinetic law compatible with the consumption rate measured in the former experiments. At higher temperatures, this complex is not stable and then easily eliminates a chlorine atom. Our work also shows that a very similar mechanism, involving the same intermediate and sharing the same transition state, allows for the elimination of HCl. A dividing coefficient between these two elimination pathways is obtained from both a potential energy surface based statistical analysis and an ab initio molecular dynamics transition path sampling simulation. It finally allows partitioning of the global consumption rate of BCl3 in terms of the formation of (i) BHCl3, (ii) BHCl2 + Cl through a H addition/Cl elimination mechanism, (iii) BCl2 + HCl through a H addition/HCl elimination mechanism, and (iv) BCl2 + HCl through direct abstraction.
</paper>

*  <paper link="paper-ReactionMechanism" title="Reaction Mechanism for the Thermal Decomposition of BCl3/CH4/H2 Gas Mixtures" date="2011" journal="The Journal of Physical Chemistry A">
This paper presents an ab initio study of the B/C/Cl/H gas phase mechanism, featuring 10 addition-elimination reactions involving BH(i)Cl(j) (i + j ≤ 3) species and a first description of the chemical interaction between the carbon-containing and boron-containing subsystems through the three reactions BCl(3) + CH(4) ⇌ BCl(2)CH(3) + HCl, BHCl(2) + CH(4) ⇌ BCl(2)CH(3) + H(2), and BCl(2) + CH(4) ⇌ BHCl(2) + CH(3). A reaction mechanism is then proposed and used to perform some illustrative equilibrium and kinetic calculations in the context of chemical vapor deposition (CVD) of boron carbide. Our results show that the new addition-elimination reaction paths play a crucial role by lowering considerably the activation barrier with respect to previous theoretical evaluations; they also confirm that BCl(2)CH(3) is an important species in the mechanism.
</paper>

*  <paper link="paper-HinderedRotor" title="Hindered rotor models with variable kinetic functions for accurate thermodynamic and kinetic predictions" date="2010" journal="The Journal of Chemical Physics">
We present an extension of some popular hindered rotor (HR) models, namely, the one-dimensional HR (1DHR) and the degenerated two-dimensional HR (d2DHR) models, allowing for a simple and accurate treatment of internal rotations. This extension, based on the use of a variable kinetic function in the Hamiltonian instead of a constant reduced moment of inertia, is extremely suitable in the case of rocking/wagging motions involved in dissociation or atom transfer reactions. The variable kinetic function is first introduced in the framework of a classical 1DHR model. Then, an effective temperature and potential dependent constant is proposed in the cases of quantum 1DHR and classical d2DHR models. These methods are finally applied to the atom transfer reaction SiCl3 + BCl3 → SiCl4 + BCl2⁠. We show, for this particular case, that a proper accounting of internal rotations greatly improves the accuracy of thermodynamic and kinetic predictions. Moreover, our results confirm (i) that using a suitably defined kinetic function appears to be very adapted to such problems; (ii) that the separability assumption of independent rotations seems justified; and (iii) that a quantum mechanical treatment is not a substantial improvement with respect to a classical one.
</paper>

*  <paper link="paper-ExpThBCl3H2" title="Experimental and theoretical investigation of BCl3 decomposition in H2" date="2008" journal="Surface and Coatings Technology">
A combined experimental and theoretical study of the homogeneous decomposition of BCl3 in a H2 carrier gas is presented. A detailed description of the B/Cl/H thermodynamic equilibrium is first obtained from ab-initio calculations from which a restricted low energy chemical mechanism is identified to model the decomposition of BCl3. Transition state theory is then invoked to obtain reaction rates and the resulting kinetic mechanism is incorporated in a 1D model of a CVD reactor. Comparison of calculated steady state concentrations with in-situ FT-IR measurements shows a good agreement at low temperatures, thus validating the kinetic model. The divergence observed at higher temperatures is attributed to boron deposition.
</paper>

---

## Co-Author

These papers were co-written or contributed collaboratively:  

*  <paper link="paper-QuantitativeProduction" title="Quantitative determination of species production from phenol-formaldehyde resin pyrolysis" date="2015" journal="Polymer Degradation and Stability">
Batch pyrolysis of a commercial resole type phenol-formaldehyde resin was performed using a step-wise heating procedure in a temperature increment of 50 K from 320 to 1290 K. A resin sample of 50 mg was loaded in a reactor assembly specifically designed and built for this study. Mass loss was measured after each 50 K step and the production of pyrolysis products was quantified using gas chromatography techniques. The overall mass loss from the samples reached 39.2% after the entire procedure. Three major product families were identified: 1) water is the most dominant product at a pyrolysis temperature below 800 K; 2) phenol derivatives (aromatic alcohols) have significant yields at a pyrolysis temperature between 500 and 850 K; 3) permanent gases such as hydrogen, methane, carbon monoxide, and carbon dioxide have the highest yields at a temperature above 800 K. Minor products observed include aromatics, which are formed between 700 and 850 K, and C2 to C4 light hydrocarbons, which are only formed above 800 K and peak at 1000 K.
</paper>

*  <paper link="paper-PyrolysisProducts" title="Measurement of pyrolysis products from phenolic polymer thermal decomposition" date="2014" journal="AIAA">
Batch pyrolysis of phenolic polymer was performed using a step-wise heating procedure in a 50 K increment from room temperature up to 1250 K. A phenolic-polymer sample of 50 mg was loaded in a reactor assembly speci_cally designed and built for this study. The mass loss was measured after each 50 K step and the production of gas-phase species was quanti_ed using gas-chromatography techniques. The overall mass loss reached about 35%. Water was found to be the dominant product below 800 K. Yields of permanent gases such as hydrogen, methane, carbon monoxide, and carbon dioxide increased with temperature up to 900 K and then decreased at higher temperatures. The yields of light hydrocarbons, such as C2 to C4 hydrocarbons, increased with reaction temperature up to 1000 K and dropped subsequently. Yields of aromatic products, including benzene, toluene, and xylene, were signi_cant between 700 and 850 K. The quantitative molar production of species versus temperature is made available for the development of detailed phenolic-polymer pyrolysis models. © 2014, American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics Inc. All rights reserved.
</paper>

*  <paper link="paper-Bloch" title="Confinement of Bloch waves in YSi2 nanostructures on Si(111)" date="2005" journal="Europhysics Letters">
Two-dimensional YSi2 or ErSi2 layers on Si(111) surface present two surface states in the vicinity of the Fermi level and form a two-dimensional surface electron gas. We have performed density functional theory (DFT) calculations of a realistic one-dimensional nanostructure of YSi2 on Si(111) to study confinement effects of this electron gas. The calculated square modulus of the wave function shows complex modulations related to the quantum interference patterns observed by scanning tunneling microscopy (STM). For each quantised state, the modulation involves at least three components consistent with the scattering of Bloch waves. A Fourier analysis of the real space modulations is used to construct the surface states dispersion curves. They are compared to the direct calculation of the ideal YSi2/Si(111) surface electronic structure and to the E(k) curves deduced from conductance images in STM experiments.
</paper>
